---
title: "How Do I Build Searches?"
permalink: building-searches.html
keywords: ["Solr", "Blacklight", "Search Builders"]
sidebar: home_sidebar
---

### Overview

Blacklight generates `app/models/search_builder.rb` into your application. It defaults to including `Blacklight::Solr::SearchBuilderBehavior` which are functions that allow Blacklight to talk to Solr (vs another search engine).  Samvera generates `include Hydra::AccessControlsEnforcement` for filtering
searches by access (groups & users).  Finally Hyrax generates `include Hyrax::SearchFilters` which overrides the Samvera filters and allows users with the admin role to see all documents.

Hyrax then sets the `blacklight_config.config.search_builder_class = Hyrax::CatalogSearchBuilder` in the catalog controller. This enables the public search to not show works that are suppressed (in workflow) and to find a work if an attached file matches the search query.



### Search Builders

Building searches is a core component of any Blacklight app. The app/search_builders/ directory contains our Search Builders, originally so-named because the class design followed a Builder pattern. Builder setter methods return the object itself when invoked, so that invocations can be chained, like:

```ruby
builder = Blacklight::SearchBuilder.new(processor_chain, scope)
            .rows(20)
            .page(3)
            .with(q: 'Abraham Lincoln')
```

However, at this level, many if not most of the additional methods do not follow this pattern. So these builders create searches in the general sense of the name, not by strictly following the Builder pattern. Refer to the `Blacklight::SearchBuilder` class if you want to be certain of whether a method can be chained. That leads to the next topic...

### Ancestry

Most of the SearchBuilders have `::SearchBuilder` as a parent or ancestor.  `::SearchBuilder` does not exist in any repo: it is generated by Blacklight and modified by CurationConcerns.  Others descend from `Blacklight::SearchBuilder`, or various other relatives.

### ::SearchBuilder

The generated parent class `SearchBuilder` descends from `Blacklight::SearchBuilder`.
As modified by the Hyrax installer, it includes additional modules and overrides.  So if your SearchBuilder has `::SearchBuilder` as a parent class, you are getting:
- [Blacklight::SearchBuilder](https://github.com/projectblacklight/blacklight/blob/master/lib/blacklight/search_builder.rb) grandparent class
- [Blacklight::Solr::SearchBuilderBehavior](https://github.com/projectblacklight/blacklight/blob/master/lib/blacklight/solr/search_builder_behavior.rb) associated methods
- [Hydra::AccessControlsEnforcement](https://github.com/samvera/hydra-head/blob/master/hydra-access-controls/lib/hydra/access_controls_enforcement.rb) module
  -  [Blacklight::AccessControls::Enforcement](https://github.com/projectblacklight/blacklight-access_controls/blob/master/lib/blacklight/access_controls/enforcement.rb) ancestor of `Hydra::AccessControlsEnforcement`
- [CurationConcerns::SearchFilters](https://github.com/samvera/curation_concerns/blob/master/app/search_builders/curation_concerns/search_filters.rb)  module that itself includes:
  - [BlacklightAdvancedSearch::AdvancedSearchBuilder](https://github.com/projectblacklight/blacklight_advanced_search/blob/master/lib/blacklight_advanced_search/advanced_search_builder.rb) more magic for compound Boolean queries
  - [CurationConcerns::FilterByType](https://github.com/samvera/curation_concerns/blob/master/app/search_builders/curation_concerns/filter_by_type.rb) Collection vs. Work filtering, specifically the `filter_models` method

This is not a comprehensive list, but it is sufficient to trace some of the complexity of interaction between various layers.

### Development: AKA Doing Something Useful

Important note: the `default_processor_chain` defined by `Blacklight::Solr::SearchBuilderBehavior` provides a way to extend functionality, but also many possible points of override (namely method names).  When you need to do something novel and additional, adding to the chain is completely reasonable.  For example:

```ruby
module MySearchBuilder
  extend ActiveSupport::Concern

  included do
    self.default_processor_chain += [:special_filter]
  end

  def special_filter(solr_parameters)
    solr_parameters[:fq] << "{!field f=some_field_ssim}#{...}"
  end
end
```

But to the extent that you are overriding (or undoing) something already done, `Hyrax::FileSetSearchBuilder` is a better example:

```ruby
module Hyrax
  class FileSetSearchBuilder < ::SearchBuilder
    include Hyrax::SingleResult

    # This overrides the models in FilterByType
    def models
      [::FileSet]
    end
  end
end
```

There is no point having the other `filter_models` methods apply `:fq`s that we then try to undo or overwrite.  In general, directly overwriting the whole `default_processor_chain` or solr parameters like `:fq` is less flexible than appending constraints sufficient for your use case.  In particular, you might find that you have overwritten components that implement access controls, thereby making your SearchBuilder less useful and less secure.  When in doubt, examine the actual solr queries produced.

### More Information
[Blacklight Quickstart](https://github.com/projectblacklight/blacklight/wiki/Quickstart)

[Solr Quickstart](http://lucene.apache.org/solr/quickstart.html)

### Legacy

[Blacklight Search Results, hydra-head version 6.0.0](https://github.com/samvera/hydra-head/wiki/Lesson:-make-blacklight-return-search-results)

[Gated Discovery Filter Search Results, permissions-based, hydra-head versions 6.4.0 and 7.2.2](https://github.com/samvera/hydra-head/wiki/Lesson---gated-discovery---filter-search-results-based-on-permissions)

[Filtering Search Results with Hydra Access Controls, 2012](https://github.com/samvera/hydra-head/wiki/Filtering-search-results-with-hydra-access-controls)
